## PREDICTIVE ANALYSIS FOR CUSTOMER CHURN IN SYRIATEL TELECOM DATA

**Authors:** Fanice Andayi
***
from PIL import Image
import IPython.display as display

# Use a raw string literal (prefix the string with 'r') to avoid interpreting backslashes as escape characters
image_path = r"C:\Users\ADMIN\Desktop\ProjectPhase3\ProjectPhase3\Images\Perspectivas-Globais_-O-Assistente-Social-em-Contextos-Internacionais.jpg"

img = Image.open(image_path)
display.display(img)

## A)BACKGROUND OF THE INDUSTRY

In the telecommunications industry, data plays a pivotal role in understanding customer behavior, optimizing network performance, and driving business strategies. With the proliferation of mobile devices, IoT (Internet of Things) devices, and high-speed internet connections, the volume and variety of data generated by telecommunications networks have surged exponentially.

Telecommunications data encompasses various types, including call records, text messages, internet usage logs, network performance metrics, customer demographics, and geographic location data. These datasets are incredibly vast and complex, often spanning millions of records generated in real-time.

Analyzing telecommunications data provides valuable insights into customer preferences, usage patterns, and satisfaction levels. By leveraging advanced analytics and machine learning techniques, telecom companies can identify opportunities for personalized marketing, targeted promotions, and improved customer experiences.

## B)INTRODUCTION

In today's hyperconnected world, telecommunications companies are at the forefront of innovation, facilitating seamless communication and connectivity for billions of people worldwide. Amidst this ever-evolving landscape, one of the most pressing challenges faced by telecom operators is the phenomenon of customer churn. 

Customer churn, the rate at which subscribers discontinue their services, not only leads to immediate revenue loss but also signifies underlying issues in service quality, customer satisfaction, and market competitiveness. To address this critical issue, SyriaTel, a prominent player in the telecommunications sector, is embarking on a transformative journey leveraging advanced analytics and machine learning. By analyzing vast troves of historical customer data, SyriaTel aims to unveil intricate patterns and insights that can accurately predict which subscribers are at risk of churning.

Armed with this foresight, SyriaTel can tailor retention strategies, enhancing customer satisfaction, and driving long-term business growth. This project endeavors to explore the potential of predictive analytics in mitigating customer churn, ultimately positioning SyriaTel as an industry leader committed to delivering exceptional service and fostering enduring customer relationships.
## C)PROBLEM STATEMENT

**what is the prevailing circumstance?**
In the telecommunications industry, particularly within the domain of SyriaTel, high customer churn rates persist as a significant concern. Despite considerable investments in marketing and customer retention strategies, the company continues to experience a notable loss of subscribers, impacting revenue streams and market competitiveness. Traditional methods for predicting churn have yielded suboptimal results, leading to ineffective allocation of resources and missed opportunities for retaining valuable customers.

**what problem are we trying to solve?**
The primary challenge this project aims to address is the inefficient management of customer churn within SyriaTel's subscriber base. High churn rates not only signify dissatisfaction among customers but also result in substantial revenue loss and hinder sustainable business growth. The existing approach to churn prediction lacks accuracy and fails to provide actionable insights necessary for implementing targeted retention strategies. Consequently, SyriaTel faces the imperative need to develop a more robust and data-driven solution to mitigate churn effectively.

**How the project aims to solve the problem?**
This project endeavors to leverage advanced analytics and machine learning techniques to develop a predictive model capable of accurately identifying customers at risk of churn. By analyzing historical customer data encompassing usage patterns, demographics, and service interactions, the project seeks to unveil hidden patterns and indicators of potential churn. Through the deployment of sophisticated algorithms and predictive modeling, SyriaTel aims to proactively identify at-risk customers and implement personalized retention initiatives. By doing so, the project aims to minimize churn rates, optimize revenue retention, and enhance overall customer satisfaction, thereby fortifying SyriaTel's position as a leader in the telecommunications industry.
## D)OBJECTIVES

**Main Objective:**

The primary objective of this project is to develop a robust predictive model to accurately forecast customer churn within SyriaTel's subscriber base, leveraging advanced analytics and machine learning techniques.

**Specific Objectives:**

1. Analyze Historical Data: Conduct in-depth analysis of SyriaTel's historical customer data, encompassing usage patterns, demographic information, service interactions, and churn records, to identify relevant features and trends indicative of potential churn.

2. Develop Predictive Model: Utilize advanced analytics and machine learning algorithms, such as logistic regression, decision trees, and ensemble methods, to build a predictive model capable of forecasting customer churn with high accuracy. This involves data preprocessing, feature selection, model training, validation, and optimization.

3. Implement Retention Strategies: Integrate the developed predictive model into SyriaTel's existing operational framework to enable real-time identification of at-risk customers. Design and implement personalized retention strategies based on the model's predictions, targeting specific customer segments with tailored offers, incentives, and proactive communication to mitigate churn effectively.

## E)NOTEBOOK STRUCTURE

1.Business Understanding

2.Data Understandiing

3.Data Cleaning

4.Exploratory Data Analysis

5.Data Preparation

6.Modelling

7.Evaluation

8.Conclusion ,Recommendations and Nextsteps.

## 1.BUSINESS UNDERSTANDING

SyriaTel, like many telecommunications companies, faces the pressing challenge of high customer churn rates, which pose significant financial losses and hinder sustainable growth. Conventional churn prediction methods have proven ineffective, leading to wasted resources and suboptimal retention efforts.

To tackle this issue, SyriaTel can harness the power of advanced analytics and machine learning. By digging into historical customer data, SyriaTel can uncover certain patterns in behavior, preferences, and usage that indicate potential churn risks. Armed with this foresight, SyriaTel can tailor retention strategies to individual customers, significantly reducing churn rates and preserving revenue streams.

By embracing proactive churn management, SyriaTel not only mitigates immediate revenue concerns but also cultivates lasting customer loyalty and strengthens its competitive position in the market. Investing in advanced analytics and machine learning capabilities not only optimizes customer retention but also sets SyriaTel apart as an industry leader committed to customer satisfaction and long-term growth.

In essence, by leveraging advanced analytics and machine learning, SyriaTel can develop a robust churn prediction model that not only addresses immediate revenue loss but also fosters enduring customer relationships and drives sustainable business expansion.

### Stakeholders
-The three key stakeholders and their interests are:-

SyriaTel Management:
Interest: Interested in reducing customer churn rates to enhance revenue streams and improve overall business performance.

Customer Service Department:
Interest: Interested in reducing the volume of customer churn-related inquiries and complaints.

Finance Department:
Interest: Interested in understanding the financial implications of customer churn and retention efforts. 

### Metric for sucess
The project will be successful if the model can correctly spot most customers who are likely to leave (High Recall), avoid wrongly flagging too many customers who won't leave (Low False Positive Rate), and perform well when dealing with new data (Reaching 80% accuracy).

## 2.DATA UNDERSTANDING

**Data Source:**
The dataset used for this project was sourced from Kaggle (Churn in Telecom's dataset) and consists of 3333 rows and 21 columns. It provides comprehensive information on customer attributes and behaviors within the telecommunications domain, enabling analysis and prediction of churn patterns.

**Data Size:**
The dataset comprises 3333 instances, each represented by 21 features. Notably, all features, except for 'Phone number' and 'State', contain numerical values, while the remaining features are categorical or binary. This structured dataset provides a sizable sample for training and testing predictive models, ensuring robustness and reliability in churn prediction.
This is a binary classification problem where the goal is to predict the likelihood of a customer churning and the **churn column** will be represented by **1 - True** and **0 - False**

|Dataset Columns|about|
|:------|------|
|State|Represents the states in the USA|
|Account length|represents the length of time (in seconds or minutes) that a customer's account has been active.|
|Area code|Geographic area code of a customer's telephone number.|
|Phone number|represents the telephone number of a customer.|
|International plan|represents whether a customer has subscribed to an international call plan or not. It can have either "Yes" or "No" values.|
|voice mail plan|represents whether a customer has subscribed to a voice mail plan or not. It can have either "Yes" or "No" values.|
|Number vmail messages|represents the number of voice mail messages left by a customer.|
|Total day minutes|represents the total amount of time (in minutes) that a customer has spent on daytime calls.|
|Total day calls|represents the total number of calls that a customer has made during the day.|
|Total day charge|represents the total charge for daytime calls made by a customer.|
|total eve minutes|represents the total amount of time (in minutes) that a customer has spent on evening calls.|
|total eve calls|represents the total number of calls that a customer has made in the evening.|
|total eve charge|represents the total charge for evening calls made by a customer.|
|total night minutes|represents the total amount of time (in minutes) that a customer has spent on night calls.|
|total night calls|represents the total number of calls that a customer has made at night.|
|total night charge|represents the total charge for night calls made by a customer.|
|total intl minutes|represents the total amount of time (in minutes) that a customer has spent on international calls.|
|total intl calls|represents the total number of international calls made by a customer.|
|total intl charge| represents the total charge for international calls made by a customer.|
|customer service calls|represents the number of customer service calls made by a customer.|
|churn|represents whether a customer has cancelled their service or not. It can have either "True" or "False" values.|

**Relevance to the Project:**
The dataset encompasses various attributes relevant to understanding customer behavior and predicting churn in the telecommunications sector. Key features include customer demographics (e.g., account length, area code), service subscriptions (e.g., international plan, voice mail plan), call usage metrics (e.g., total day minutes, total night calls), and churn status. The 'Churn' column, serving as the target variable, distinguishes between customers who have canceled their service ('True') and those who have not ('False'). This rich dataset forms the foundation for developing a predictive model to identify churn risks accurately and implement targeted retention strategies, aligning with the project's objective of mitigating customer churn effectively.

## 6.MODELING

In coming up with the best model, the following approach will be taken:

&#9677; Fitting a baseline model( logistic regression) to act as the benchmark

&#9677; Fitting a non-parametric model - decision trees. It captures nonlinear relationships and interactions in the data and are easy to interpret. They provide a good contrast to logistic regression and can handle complex decision boundaries.

&#9677; Fitting an instance-based Model - k-Nearest Neighbors (k-NN).k-NN is a simple and intuitive algorithm that classifies data points based on the majority class of their k nearest neighbors in the feature space. It can capture local patterns and is robust to noise.

&#9677; Fitting an Ensemble Model - Random Forests .IT is an ensemble of decision trees and typically outperforms individual decision trees. It combines multiple weak learners to create a strong learner, reducing overfitting and improving predictive accuracy.

&#9677; Gradient Boosting Model GBM is an ensemble learning technique that builds multiple decision trees sequentially, with each tree correcting the errors of the previous one. It often provides superior performance compared to random forest, albeit at the cost of increased complexity.

&#9677; XGBoost Model: fitting an XGBoost classifier, which is an optimized version of gradient boosting. XGBoost often yields better performance than traditional gradient boosting with enhanced speed and efficiency.

&#9677; Hyperparameters tuning of the two best models ( taking into account prediction accuracy and recall)

## Evaluation of Models 

**Interpretation of Results**

Different models used: Decision Tree,Logistic Regression, Random Forest, KNN,Gradient boosting and XG Boost. Assessing their performance three models were selected and tuned for better performance.

The Test ROC AUC Score measures how well the model can distinguish between the positive and negative outcomes.It thus tells us how well the model can separate the two types of predictions.Gradient Boosting Model had the highest Test ROC AUC Score of 0.76, indicating that it can better differentiate between the positive and negative outcomes.

Based on these metrics, Gradient Boosting performed the best among the models we evaluated. It showed higher accuracy in making predictions and better ability to distinguish between different outcomes.
Rlatively high Recall: It correctly identifies most customers who are likely to leave, minimizing false negatives.
Low False Positive Rate: It avoids wrongly flagging too many customers who won't leave, minimizing false positives.

**Gradient Boosting is the selected Model**

- **Total day minutes, total night minutes, and total eve minutes**: These three features are identified as the most important predictors of customer churn. Customers who spend more time on calls during the day, night, and evening are more likely to churn. 
- **Customer service calls**: This feature is also highlighted as a significant predictor. High numbers of customer service calls may indicate dissatisfaction or unresolved issues, leading to increased churn rates. Effective management of customer service interactions is crucial for reducing churn.
- **International plan**: The presence or absence of an international plan is identified as another important predictor. Customers without an international plan are more likely to churn compared to those with one. Offering attractive international plans could help retain customers.
- **Total day charge**: The total charge for daytime calls is noted as an important predictor. Higher charges may contribute to dissatisfaction and ultimately lead to churn. Providing competitive pricing or value-added services could help mitigate this risk.
- **Voice mail plan**: Whether a customer has a voice mail plan is also identified as a significant predictor. Customers with a voice mail plan are less likely to churn compared to those without one. Promoting the benefits of voice mail plans could help improve customer retention.

## 8.CONCLUSION

## Limitations

While no model is perfect, the selected model effectively identifies customers at risk of churning. However, this comes with a trade-off: it may mistakenly label some non-churning customers as churners. As a result, resources may be allocated to retain customers who are unlikely to leave, leading to potential inefficiencies in retention efforts.

### Recommendations

1. **Enhance Network Coverage:** Invest in expanding and improving network infrastructure to ensure comprehensive coverage, reducing dissatisfaction caused by poor connectivity.
  
2. **Personalized Customer Experience:** Utilize customer data and analytics to understand individual preferences and behavior. Create personalized marketing messages, offers, and service suggestions to make each customer feel valued and enhance their overall experience.

3. **Proactive Customer Support:** Implement proactive customer support strategies, such as predictive issue detection and resolution, to address potential problems before they escalate. Promptly resolve customer complaints and inquiries to demonstrate responsiveness and commitment to customer satisfaction.

4. **Introduce Value-Added Services and Offers:** Implement loyalty programs, exclusive offers, and perks to incentivize customer loyalty. Provide discounts, free upgrades, or access to premium content to reward long-term customers.

5. **Regular Communication:** Maintain regular communication with customers through personalized emails, SMS, or in-app messages. Keep customers informed about new services, features, and promotions to keep them engaged and informed.

6. **Customer Feedback and Surveys:** Actively seek feedback from customers through surveys to understand their pain points and areas for improvement. Use this feedback to enhance services and address customer needs effectively.

7. **Proactive Churn Prediction:** Utilize data analytics and predictive modeling to identify potential churners. Implement targeted retention efforts to mitigate churn risks effectively.

### Next steps

- Collect more data: The dataset used in this project is relatively small, and collecting more data could improve the model's performance and make it more robust.
- Deploy the model: After the model is finalized, it can be deployed in a production environment.
- Monitor and update the model: Once the model is deployed, it is important to monitor its performance and update it regularly with new data to ensure it remains accurate and effective.

[Tele Image]: C:\Users\ADMIN\Desktop\ProjectPhase3\ProjectPhase3\Images\industry-telecom-overview-two-thirds.jpg